init: frontmatter support (#114)
nix-community/nixdoc: doc/frontmatter.md

## Why frontmatter is needed (sometimes)

Sometimes it is desireable to extend the native doc-comment functionality. For that user-scenario, frontmatter can be optionally used.

Frontmatter is the de-facto standard of adding document specific meta tags to markdown. [1](https://docs.github.com/en/contributing/writing-for-github-docs/using-yaml-frontmatter) [2](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/front-matter/) [3](https://starlight.astro.build/reference/frontmatter/)

it can be useful for:

- Enriching documentation generation.
- Maintaining References.
- Metadata inclusion.
- Allow better Handling of documentation edge cases.

## Detailed design

Frontmatter is defined using `key`-`value` pairs, encapsulated within triple-dashed lines (---).

While there is no strict specification for frontmatter formats, YAML is commonly preferred.
Although JSON could also be used alternatively.

Only `key`s from the list of available keywords can be used.

The `value` is any valid yaml value. Its type and semantics is specified by each keyword individually.

Example:

```nix
{
  /** 
    ---
    tags:
      - foo
      - bar
    ---
  */
  foo = x: x;
}
```

> In this example `key` is `tags` and `value` is `List("foo", "bar")`.

Reviewer: Very minor suggestion, but since we don't support a `tags` key, let's just make it generic. Bonus is that we can just reuse the `key` and `value` terms used above without having to further clarify ("`key` is `tags` and ...")

~~~suggestion
    key: value
    ---
  */
  foo = x: x;
}
```
~~~

See also: [yaml specification](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2.2/) for how to use YAML.

## Keywords

### `doc_location`

Rules:

> 1. The `doc_location` keyword can be used to use content from another file INSTEAD of the doc-comments content.

Reviewer: During the meeting we discussed forbidding any extra doc-comment content entirely:

```suggestion
1. The `doc_location` keyword can be used to use content from another file and **forbid** any further content to be added to the existing doc-comment.
```

Author: Ok. but this, should then also be checked if possible. Going to add an additional check to the implementation.

2. The value must be given as a path relative to the current file.

> 3. Using this directive does not process any content inside the file, using it as-is.

Reviewer: This rewording makes it clearer which file you're talking about.

```suggestion
3. The file pointed to by `doc_location` will be used as-is, without any further processing done to it.
```

```nix
{
  /** 
  ---
  doc_location: ./path.md
  ---
  */
  foo = x: x;
}
```

`path.md`
```md
some nice docs!
```

> In this example, the `doc_location` directive fetches content from `./path.md` treating it as if it were directly within the doc-comment.

Reviewer: This rewording avoids anyone thinking they could possibly include `doc_location` and also add content in the doc-comment, and have both contents get merged.

```suggestion
In this example, the `doc_location` directive fetches content from `./path.md` and treats it as the actual doc-comment.
```

This allows tracking the reference between the source position and the markdown file, in case of external documentation.

#### Design decision: Relative vs Absolute paths

> This section justifies the previous decision why absolute paths are not allowed.

Reviewer: You haven't said that absolute paths are not allowed anywhere until now. I suggest rewording:

```suggestion
This section explains the decision to only use relative paths and not support absolute paths for the file pointed to by `doc_location`.
```

<details>
<summary>Should absolute paths be allowed?</summary>

- (+) When the docs are entirely elsewhere, e.g. `doc/manual/..`, a relative path would have to be `../../..`, very ugly

>   - (-) If only relative paths are allowed, encourages moving docs closer to the source,
>     Makes changing documentation easier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - (-) If only relative paths are allowed, encourages moving docs closer to the source, makes changing documentation easier.
```

>     - For the nix-build, adjustments which files are included in the derivation source may be needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - For the nix-build, adjustments of which files are included in the derivation source may be needed.
```

  - (-) With only relative paths, it's more similar to NixOS module docs

> - (-) Makes it very confusing with where absolute paths are relative to (build root, git root, `.nix` location, etc.)
> - (-) We can still allow absolute paths later on if necessary
> - (-) Relies on a Git repository and git installed
> - (-) It's unclear where absolute paths are rooted
>   - (+) Could use a syntax like `$GIT_ROOt/foo/bar`
>     - (-) Not a fan of more custom syntax

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- (-) We can still allow absolute paths later on if necessary
- (-) Makes it very confusing where absolute paths are relative to (build root, git root, `.nix` location, etc.)
  - (+) Could use a syntax like `$GIT_ROOT/foo/bar`
    - (-) Relies on a Git repository and git installed
    - (-) Not a fan of more custom syntax
```

**Decision**: Not supported by now.

> This outcome was discussed in the nix documentation team: https://discourse.nixos.org/t/2024-03-21-documentation-team-meeting-notes-114/41957.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This outcome was discussed in the nix documentation team meeting: https://discourse.nixos.org/t/2024-03-21-documentation-team-meeting-notes-114/41957.
```

</details>

## Error handling

Any issues encountered during the processing of frontmatter — be it syntax errors, invalid paths, or unsupported keywords—should result in clear, actionable error messages to the user.

## Extensibility

The initial set of keywords is intentionally minimalistic, focusing on immediate and broadly applicable needs.

When extending this document we ask our contributors to be tooling agnostic, such that documentation wont't rely on any implementation details.

> This approach ensures that the documentation remains independent of specific implementation details. By adhering to this principle, we aim to create a resource that is universally applicable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach ensures that the documentation remains independent of specific implementation details. By adhering to this principle, we aim to create a resource that is universally applicable.
```

# Frontmatter

This document is the specification for custom metadata within doc-comments.

It should only apply to doc-comments (`/** */`) and not to regular code comments to ensure a limited scope.

## Why frontmatter is needed (sometimes)

Sometimes it is desireable to extend the native doc-comment functionality. For that user scenario, frontmatter can be optionally used.

i.e.,

- Enriching documentation generation.
- Maintaining References.
- Metadata inclusion.
- Allow better Handling of edge cases.

## Detailed design

Fields (from Keywords list) can be defined in frontmatter.

Frontmatter is defined using key-value pairs, encapsulated within triple-dashed lines (---).

> While there is no strict specification for frontmatter formats, YAML is commonly preferred. Although JSON could also be used alternatively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While there is no strict specification for frontmatter formats, YAML is commonly preferred.
Although JSON could also be used alternatively.
```

`{key}` is a placeholder for the list of available keywords listed below.

`{value}` is a placeholder for the set value associated with the directive.

Example:

```nix
{
/** 
  ---
  import: ./path.md
  ---
*/
foo = x: x;
}
```

In this example, the `import` directive fetches content from `./path.md` treating it as if it were directly within the doc-comment.
This allows tracking the reference between the source position and the markdown file, in case of extensive documentation.

## Keywords

### Import

Rules:

1. The `import` keyword can be used to use content from another file INSTEAD of the doc-comments content.

> 2. The value `file` must be given as an absolute path (relative to git root) or relative to the current file.

Reviewer 2: Should absolute paths be allowed?
- (+) When the docs are entirely elsewhere, e.g. `doc/manual/..`, a relative path would have to be `../../..`, very ugly
  - (-) If only relative paths are allowed, encourages moving docs closer to the source
    
    Makes changing documentation easier
    - For the Nixpkgs manual build, needs to adjust which files are included in the derivation source
  - (-) With only relative paths, it's more similar to NixOS module docs
- (-) Makes it very confusing with where absolute paths are relative to (build root, git root, `.nix` location, etc.)
- (-) We can still allow absolute paths later on if necessary
- (-) Relies on a Git repository and git installed
- (-) It's unclear where absolute paths are rooted
  - (+) Could use a syntax like `$GIT_ROOt/foo/bar`
    - (-) Not a fan of more custom syntax

Decision: Don't allow for now

This can be added to the design document (I recommend `<details> </details>`)

3. There can only be one `import` per doc-comment.

```nix
{
/** 
 ---
 import: ./path.md
 ---
*/
foo = x: x;
}
```

`path.md`
```md
some nice docs!
```

> Rendering this would behave as if the content where actually placed in the doc-comment itself.

Reviewer 2: With the switch to `doc-comment` name, makes more sense to formulate this as "defer to" instead of "pull"

Placing frontmatter inside the imported file will be ignored. (No nested directives)

> Since handling recursive or nested imports adds too much complexity for little or no benefit.

Reviewer 2: Recommended rewording to: nixdoc does not process any content inside the file, using it as-is

> Note: Absolute path imports are relative to the repository root. They only work inside `git` repositories and require having the `git` binary in PATH.
> This is most commonly used in large repositories or when the documentation files are not placed alongside the .nix files.

## Extensibility

> The initial set of keywords is intentionally minimalistic,
> focusing on immediate and broadly applicable needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The initial set of keywords is intentionally minimalistic, focusing on immediate and broadly applicable needs.
```
